IMT 575, Autumn 2018 - Project Proposal
Team - Sahil Aggarwal, Amir Ali, Richard McGovern, Shreya Sabharwal

Yelp is a platform to connect people with local businesses such as restaurants, dental clinics, and barbershops. Businesses post information including their open hours, photos, and address, while users “check in” to places they visit and leave reviews. Potential customers use this information to decide where to shop. Local businesses have an opportunity to benefit from the Yelp community and can improve their rating by making use of the platform and favorably adapting.

Dataset:The Yelp dataset consists of businesses, reviews and users data from 10 metropolitan areas. These files are available in JSON format and we are specifically interested in the business, reviews, users and check-in files for Phoenix, AZ area. Below is the description of these files (Yelp Dataset):
business.json - contains data about participating businesses including their location, neighborhood and business categories such as “restaurant.”
review.json - consists of reviews from users for each of the businesses in the business.json file.
user.json - consists of metadata of the user and number of reviews written
checkin.json - consists of check-in times for each day for each of the businesses. 

There is significant literature that states that Yelp ratings have a profound effect on the success of a business (Anderson and Magruder, 2011). To grow and improve their business, a lot of restaurants have a well-laid out plan to improve the visibility of their profile. These efforts include building a great profile, responding to customer reviews, using yelp metrics to track the traffic on their profile and targeted advertising to reach more customers. While all these efforts help increase positive reviews and (in some cases) lead to higher rating, we want to investigate if there are other factors that might result in higher reviews for a business on Yelp.
We are specifically interested in investigating to what extent does the location, business diversity, and demographics of an area affect a business’s Yelp rating? 
There are many potential layers within “location” in this proposed analysis. A shop’s point in space and location in a neighborhood are important, but also its proximity to other stores and clusters of stores of similar category. The distance between a store and other points interest may also matter, such as transportation hubs, schools, libraries, and other neighborhoods with various demographics. 

Yelp reviews not only inform consumers about the quality of a business, but also helps businesses in streamlining their efforts to gauge a higher rating on the platform.  Different from most other types of items that have been studied in various recommender systems (e.g., movie, song, book), a business physically exists at a geographical location, and most businesses have geographical neighbors within walking distance. In recent years, numerous studies propose different factors that might affect the yelp rating for a business, but there is no empirical evidence of the effect of sequential and temporal location of a business on the rating. We further supplement this by measuring the underlying effect of the neighborhood level demographics of a location and inspect how factors such as age, income etc. might affect the rating. Further, most of the existing literature pays little attention to measure if the diversity of an established businesses in the vicinity might increase Yelp rating. In this project, we aim to run a systematic approach to run all these experiments to measure the impact of geographical neighborhood on the ratings of a business on Yelp.com

Technology:
Our initial steps will involve writing python scripts to parse the json files and loading the data into a relational database. Creating a schema and having the data in a relational database will allow for easy join of data from multiple sources and will allow us to easily filter the tables for processing.We will setup a SQL server database using Microsoft Azure as our data set is several gigabytes in size. Most of the exploratory analysis and modeling will be done using Python.  For the analysis of the location data we will use a Python package called geolocation. This package will allow us to easily get information about a given location using the google maps api. The package has modules to calculate travel distance and times. For visualization of our results we will use Tableau dashboards linked to our database.  


Deliverable:
Our deliverables will likely include a heatmap of aggregate Yelp reviews by business category during certain time intervals (maybe by hour or morning/mid-day/evening), overlaid over city street and parcel data. We will try to implement an interactive component perhaps with an R Shiny app, or in Python. Static maps to show various dimensions here will be helpful as well. We may also develop a dashboard of Yelp scores over time and districts or census block groups by business category. 


Risks: 
Since the dataset includes data from Phoenix area only, our analysis and recommendations might be specific to that area. The recommendations might not be representative of the United States. One of our primary assumptions is that the reviews which are the base of the Yelp score are authentic and not from any super-user. Checking the authenticity of the reviews is not in the scope of this project. We don’t intend to use the metadata of the user as we want to focus on the reviews for the businesses without being concerned about the user. However, joining the datasets from multiple sources might reveal the identity of the users. 

Stakeholders:
Stakeholders for this project are primarily businesses trying to improve their Yelp score. However it will also impact the experience of Yelp users, the evolving competition on Yelp, the effectiveness of Yelp’s recommendation engine (and therefore part of their business model), and also customers who visit these businesses which now might be in new locations and within proximity to others. This project can help provide some early evidence for or against the importance of Yelp ratings. It can also provide a integration of multiple spatial features to investigate the vicissitudes of public opinion and diversity in retail business.

Mid-term and final “checks for success”:
Over the next couple of weeks, we will gather as many relevant datasets, clean, and format them to enable integration. There will be a learning curve and some initial setup required to enable our geospatial computations. We will aim to have a few datasets operationalized for distance calculations and spatial visualization by early-mid November. A later objective would be some well-developed visualizations (maps, heatmaps, a dashboard, and/or an interactive map). 


References
M. Anderson and J. Magruder. “Learning from the Crowd.” The Economic Journal. 5 October, 2011.
Yelp Dataset Documentation. https://www.yelp.com/dataset/documentation/main




